---
layout: post
title:  "The Religion of Atheism"
date:	2015-08-22
categories: religion humour
---

The following isn't meant to be taken very seriously. But still as a logician I
find it very amusing.

Sometimes you hear people say that atheism is just like religion: you don't
believe in god, so you believe god does not exist, so you still _believe_ in
something. Well my friends, behold for the true religion of atheism and its
humble prophet - yours truly.

God came to me one night. The heavens opened and through rays of shining light
the Lord almighty appeared in the full magnificence of his glory.

"Do you believe in me?" he asked.

In the shock of the moment I sat frozen in my chair, not knowing what to do.
After an awkward pause which seemed like ages to me he asked again.

"Yes my son, I am talking to you. Do you believe in me?"

At this point I realised I had to say something. I though if he really was the
God, then there was no point in lying to him. So I decided to be honest.

"No my Lord," I said, "I am afraid I don't. Well... I didn't... I mean..."

"You see my son," he interrupted me, "I created the mankind in my image, that
is smart and rational. There is no evidence of my existence, so any rational
being would conclude that I don't exist. But some people are so desperate to
have answers for their existential questions that they invented so many gods...
I've even lost the count now. It's not what I want... It's not like I believe
in god of gods..."

There was some desperation in God's voice. He sounded like a parent who used
every trick in the book to teach something to a child without any effect.

"Think about it," he continued. "To explain and give meaning to your existence,
you postulate the existence of a timeless and spaceless being and then to all
the new questions you just say "God is incomprehensible." Well if I am really
so incomprehensible, how do they know I want them to believe in me and to pray
to me. That doesn't make any sense. There will be no mercy to these people, I
am sending all the believers to the hell. The atheists will join me in the
heaven. So go on my son, continue not believing in me!"

"But my Lord," I objected, "now that you've come to me, would it not be
rational to start believing in you?"

"Do you know how common are
[hallucinations](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Hallucination#Epidemiology)?
[Link added by the editor.] Any rational being would conclude that he is
hallucinating. Now go my son and spread my word to those who still can escape
the eternal fire in the hell."

So my friends here is the message for you from God: Don't believe in god,
because there is no reason to think that god, even if he exists, wants us to
believe in him.
