---
layout: post
title:  "A Peace Plan for Armenia, Azerbaijan and Turkey"
date:   2015-06-20
categories: politics
---

In the late 1980s Armenia and Azerbaijan went to war over Nagorno Karabakh. The
war took the lives of some 30000 people and displaced over a million civilians.
A ceasefire has been agreed in 1994, but negotiations since have failed to
produce a permanent resolution of the conflict. Hostilities between Armenians
and Azeris have continued and the region remains one of the most militarised
places in the world.

So why hasn't the conflict found a resolution, despite all the effort and the
pressure from the international community? It could be argued that the corrupt
governments of both states use the conflict to hold hostage their own people.
(News of skirmishes on the line of contact is the perfect tool to divert public
attention to the external "enemy".) Besides, a certain powerful state has made
billions from selling arms to Azerbaijan and has used the conflict as an easy
pressure point onto Armenia. So why would they want a resolution?

Well leaving this issue aside, I think there is another reason. The conflict of
Nagorno Karabakh has been treated as a post-Soviet conflict, in the sense that
it arose from the breakup of the Soviet Union. So the existing proposals have
taken as a starting point the state of affairs at the breakup of the Soviet
Union. The roots of the conflict however go to the breakup of the Russian
empire in the First World War, when Karabakh was first contested between newly
created republics of Armenia and Azerbaijan. Karabakh, however, wasn't the only
territorial dispute Armenia found itself in. Turkish republic sought to
recapture the territory lost to Russian empire and eventually forced a vary
unfavourable settlement onto Armenia.

Of course another event that shaped Armenia at the time was the Armenian
Genocide by Ottoman Turkey. Modern Turkey can dispute as long as it wants
weather the Armenian deportations were intended to exterminate the Armenian
people. The end result is that there are virtually no Armenians leaving in
modern day east Turkey, where they lived long before Turkic tribes came. What
does Azerbaijan have to do with it? Well the "one nation, two states" motto
(with respect to Turkey and Azerbaijan) championed by Azerbaijan makes them in
the eyes of Armenians complicit with Turkey in their "attempt to wipe Armenians
and take their homeland". So when Sumgait and Baku pogroms started they brought
back the collective memory of 1915. And for Armenians Karabakh war wasn't a war
for territory or for resources, it was a war for survival. Of course Azerbaijan
had no part at all in the Armenian Genocide. But when a nation suffers such a
trauma, things are perceived differently. Needless to say that continued denial
by Turkey has made it much worse. In my view Turkey is a part of the problem,
so it has to be a part of the solution as well.

Before setting out my proposal, lets look at the current situation (the image
is taken from adst.org).

![Nagorno Karabakh Conflict Map](/assets/nk_map.jpg)

Now Armenian proposals have centered on the idea of territories for
recognition. I.e. Armenia returns the occupied territories outside of Karabakh
(except Lachin in order to keep a land connection with Karabakh) in exchange
Azerbaijan recognises the independence of Karabakh (or their desire to join
Armenia). So we would like to see something of the this form.

![Armenian Prosols Map](/assets/nk_map1.jpg)

Azerbaijan has long rejected such proposals. And one can see where they are
coming from: essentially this amounts to satisfying the original demands of
Karabakhi Armenians to join Armenia (plus Lachin is lost as well) and thus
conceding a defeat. Azerbaijan has become much more powerful recently through
oil money. So why would they concede defeat now? Now to make the deal more
attractive for Azerbaijan, Armenia should add something to it. I suggest that
Armenia can offer something to Azerbaijan, which it wants but didn't have even
before Karabakh conflict. By that I mean a land connection to Nakhichevan.

![Land Connection to Nakhichevan Map](/assets/nk_map2.jpg)

Now as far as I know these kinds of proposals have been discussed in Key West
in 2001 where some form of a joint administration of Lachin and Meghri (connecting
Azerbaijan to Nakhichevan) corridors have been proposed. With the level of
hostilities between Azerbaijan and Armenia being so high, I don't think a joint
administration is a possibility. So my proposal is for a territorial exchange.

But under these arrangements Armenia would lose a border with Iran. Now for a
landlocked country, the number of bordering countries is vital and having a
border with three countries rather than four makes a huge difference. Say if
Azerbaijan and Turkey decide to impose an economic blockade, Armenia will have
only Georgia to rely on. No sensible Armenian would agree with that.

To remedy this, I suggest that Armenia and Turkey can exchange territories so
that Armenia regains a border with Iran. Now you could argue that Turkey is not
a party to the conflict and indeed it is not a participant in the Minsk group.
But Turkey has taken an active role in the conflict by closing the border with
Armenia. And as I have argued above it also had a different role.

My proposal would look something like this.

![Final map](/assets/nk_map3.jpg)

An important question is what will happen to people leaving in the territories
that are being exchanged. Fortunately, the territories being exchanged between
Armenia and Turkey have very little population. The Armenian town of Meghri is
in the proposed corridor connecting Azerbaijan to Nakhichevan. It has a
population of 5000. I think these people should have the option of staying or
relocating. In the latter case either state should generously compensate them
for their property. So I hope this problem can be solved.

I'll briefly describe what each party gains from the proposal other than peace.
Of course peace and stability are the main gains for everyone.

**Armenia.** Armenia would have territorial gains in term of internationally
recognised territories. (Although the territory under Armenian control
decreases.) Plus in the territorial exchange with Turkey Armenia gets the mount
Ararat (and that is the reason it is so awkwardly shaped), which is of enormous
symbolic value to Armenia.

**Azerbaijan.** Azerbaijan officially loses Karabakh, but instead gains
Nakhichevan. It is already part of Azerbaijan, but Nakhichevan is very
isolated. The shortest connection from Nakhichevan to the rest of Azerbaijan is
through Armenia or Iran. Both of these countries are hostile to Azerbaijan,
which makes Nakhichevan a long way away from Baku. This can change with a land
connection.

**Turkey.** Turkey doesn't gain much territorially, but it also doesn't loose
much. It looses a border with Nakhichevan, but since Nakhichevan wasn't
connected to the rest of Azerbaijan, it is not a big loss. In addition, a
border change agreement with Armenia and Turkey would implicitly or even
explicitly mean that Armenia won't have territorial claims to Turkey. 
I think the possibility of territorial reparations is one reason Turkey
continues to deny the Armenian Genocide.

I realise that getting three countries to agree a border change is not an easy
task. But I think this plan provides an opportunity in an otherwise deadlocked
conflict. When I describe this plan to my (Armenian) friends, they often say
neither Armenia, nor Azerbaijan, nor Turkey would agree. I think this means
that it is a sensible proposal.
